---
title: Outputs
permalink: /outputs/
---

The “Music, mobile phones and community justice in Melanesia” project
integrates partner and community-driven applications with academic outcomes
such as publications and presentations.

## Publications

### Journal Articles

Dick, T. (forthcoming). From sik kago to sik bingo: Local engagements with
peacebuilding and development in Vanuatu Journal of Peacebuilding and
Development (accepted 1 Mar 2019).

Communication between local, communities and international organisations is
often fraught. The temporal dislocation of visiting Western actors can trigger
friction within the local community when they are left to make sense of
orthodoxies such as economic practices associated with the cash economy,
tourism, and even peacebuilding and development. A disturbing pattern has
emerged in Vanuatu as a localised response to the peacebuilding and development
narrative of the international aid sector. The authors are witnessing an
increasing complexity of local responses which are explicitly designed to
destabilise non-local orthodoxies such as private property, sustainable
development, and interventions which frame local entrepreneurs as deficient in
technical and vocational education. Communities prepare for visits from
development professionals by strategically presenting themselves as deficient,
so as to “benefit” from the development activities. Thus, development projects
oriented from a deficit thinking perspective came to be known  as interventions
using a sik kago approach. They often manifest a modernist developmentalist
ethos. In this paper, a ni-Vanuatu artist, cultural producer, and founder of a
local cultural organisation, engages in critical dialogue with  an Australian
producer who lived in Vanuatu for almost a decade exploring the shift in the
development orthodoxy from sik kago to sik bingo. 


### Book Chapters

Dick, T. and Doyle, S. (forthcoming). Screen Sovereignty: Urban Youth and
Community Media in Vanuatu, in Keith Comacho (ed.) Reppin Da Native City: A
Youth Studies Reader of Oceania University of Washington Press, Seattle
(accepted 1 Oct 2018).

This chapter explores the ways that indigenous Pacific Island youth in the
post-colonial, urban setting of Port Vila, the capital of Vanuatu, increasingly
utilize digital media to advance their ideas and sense of belonging. We focus
on media (and multimedia) production as a practice of ni-Vanuatu youth "screen
sovereignty." A range of visual media productions is analyzed, principally
video productions. We also draw on interviews conducted with members of Nesar
Studio – a community access media production facility located at Further Arts –
who constitute an emergent social category in Vanuatu: young independent media
producers. We explore the contexts and practices of youth media production in a
contemporary postcolonial urban society and how organizational forces shape
these practices. Rimix is used as a framework for generating new understandings
about the way that young urban ni-Vanuatu are negotiating community,
institutional, and professional obligations as well as leveraging opportunities
for producing media that demonstrate screen sovereignty. 


## Other

We have come to Testify book: A book consisting of the full Byak Testimony,
with artwork, background and other information. Includes a copy of the We Have
Come To Testify CD.

## Recordings (CD)

### We have come to Testify- Various Artists

### Nēvēnek- (Ground Music from Torba,Vanuatu) - Various Artists

In the north eastern corner of the Coral Sea is a group of reefs, atolls, and
islands a complex aqua/archi-pelago - where the 9000 residents share more than
15 languages and one overarching cosmology of respect, which they refer to as
Qat. In 2018, Sandy Sur invited a team of producers and researchers to
experience the dung verei the sounds of four of these islands: Gaua,
Ureparapara, Rowa and Mota Lava. The Banks Islanders are renowned for supplying
seafood to the entire nation of Vanuatu (especially coconut crab), for being
the production powerhouse of som - shell money, and for the aqua-sonic stylings
of the women’s water music. Nēvēnek: Ground Music from Torba, Vanuatu features
songs and stories that touch on all of these elements and introduce some other
less familiar aspects of Banks Islands culture. From soaring vocal harmonies to
the breathy solos of elders, from bamboo pipes to ground plates, these
recordings has been curated with the chiefs and the communities. Nēvēnek is
music grounded in place, while also presenting a sense of how the people of
Torba see themselves as situated in a contemporary world; indeed the recordings
here connect banks Islanders to Queensland through the Pacific Island
slave-trade on the late 19th century, to the first arrival and acceptance of
traders and missionaries, to the global process of decolonisation and
nation-forming in the late 20th century. Nēvēnek is a compendium of an oral
history that is alive and evolving.

## Apps

### Byak - We Have Come To Testify

An app presenting musical, spoken, and written testimony from survivors of the Byak massacre

  [Android - Google Play Store](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=net.m3dev.byak&hl=en)

  [Apple iOS - App Store](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/byak/id1497858887?ls=1)


